about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: About Jeff Wilcox - Software Developer
permalink: /about/
---
# Hi.

I'm a software developer "and whatever it takes" at Microsoft.

I've been at MSFT since I graduated from the University of Michigan and have had unique opportunities at Microsoft to help work on shipping several products from start through maturity, including Silverlight (a plug-in application platform for browsers) and the Windows Phone. Many of my projects have been open source and cross-platform.

I've worked on these products and projects:

- ASP.NET 2.0
- Silverlight 2
- Silverlight Toolkit (open source controls)
- Silverlight 3
- Silverlight 4
- Silverlight 5
- Windows Phone 7
- Windows Phone Toolkit (open source)
- Windows Phone 7.5
- Windows 8
- Windows Phone 8
- Windows Azure SDKs (open source)
- Windows Azure Command Line Tools (open source, cross-platform)
- Microsoft Azure Development Staff

Today I work on the Azure team on special assignment as a Principal SDE Architect and Technical Assistant to the CVP of Development. We're a different Microsoft: we often ship and develop our code in the open on GitHub.

I am also the developer of 4th &amp; Mayor, the top-rated social application on the Windows Phone Store, designed as a simple, crisp and easy third party client for the foursquare service.

## Resume

For a detailed look at my expertise, skills and previous team projects, please review my [LinkedIn profile - 
Jeff Wilcox](http://linkedin.com/in/jeffreywilcox).

## Across the Internet

Twitter: [@jeffwilcox](https://twitter.com/jeffwilcox)
Flickr: [jeffwilcox](http://www.flickr.com/photos/jeffwilcox)

Commit message:

Updating with newer Bootstrap 4 essentials.

about.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: About Jeff Wilcox - Software Developer
permalink: /about/
---
# Hi.

Jeff Wilcox is a principal software engineer "and whatever it takes" at Microsoft, 
currently working on the Azure team (Microsoft's public cloud).

He specializes in cross-platform software development and helping Microsoft better 
embrace open source technologies and the OSS ecosystem. Previously, Jeff worked on 
several Microsoft platforms and technologies spanning desktop and browser client, 
phone, and server.

He holds a BS in Computer Science from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Jeff lives in Seattle, WA and is also the independent developer of 4th & Mayor, the 
top-rated social app on the Windows Phone store, with over half a million users.

<!--
I've worked on these products and projects:

- ASP.NET 2.0
- Silverlight 2
- Silverlight Toolkit (open source controls)
- Silverlight 3
- Silverlight 4
- Silverlight 5
- Windows Phone 7
- Windows Phone Toolkit (open source)
- Windows Phone 7.5
- Windows 8
- Windows Phone 8
- Windows Azure SDKs (open source)
- Windows Azure Command Line Tools (open source, cross-platform)
- Microsoft Azure Development Staff
-->

## Resume

For a detailed look at my expertise, skills and previous team projects, please review my [LinkedIn profile - 
Jeff Wilcox](http://linkedin.com/in/jeffreywilcox).

## Twitter

Twitter: [@jeffwilcox](https://twitter.com/jeffwilcox)
